mr. city that my were the first words of
welcome to use in the language of your
own small Koosh hours of his robe luna
dijah or an hour Optus the tourists are
in a new roof throng who shall lift Lord
Slynt
Kermit scared me laughs Archer Oh Cree
art August
Gammage shun August sonís or thin August
our van Kela Nancy others are one sure
of Erica tis a great honor to welcome
the President of the United States to
this joint session of both houses of
their office we welcome you mr.
president as the leader of a nation and
other people with whom Ireland enjoys a
relationship unique for its deep and
abiding friendship
we welcome you as the president of the
most powerful democracy on earth a
country committed since its foundation
to the fundamental concepts of
representative government and the rights
of the individual under law the links
between the United States and Ireland
are warm and enduring they were forged
by history and by a shared commitment to
common goal they reflect ties of kinship
and fellowship
built over many centuries these ties
have acted as a compelling force in the
life and development of each nation
millions of Irish people have traveled
across the Atlantic over the centuries
in search of a home like your ancestors
mr. president they left this country
armed only with hope and fortitude but
inspired by a vision of a new life with
all its challenges in a new world we are
grateful for the opportunities offer
them opportunities to build a home rear
a family earn a living and above all
breathe the air of freedom we are proud
that so many of them and their
descendants responded to these
opportunities achieved success in
private industry and public life and
reached the pinnacle in so many areas
particularly in the political arena as
evidence your presence your presence
with us today mr. president for the
Irish it could with truths be said that
America did as the inscription for the
Statue of Liberty proclaims lift her
lamp beside the Golden Door our two
nations today enjoy many political
cultural and economic links but on
occasions such as this serves to remind
us that a true source and strength of
our special friendship lies in shared
roots and ideals mutually cherished and
mutually enriching the relationship mr.
president is in one sense unique the
relations between
the United States and many countries in
the world are based on factors of mutual
interest be their strategic or
commercial our relationship is not
fundamentally based on any of these
considerations it is based primarily and
almost exclusively on people this is the
firmest
and most enduring basis of all your
visit mr. president will reinforce and
reinvigorate this powerful bond that
unites us mr. president
it is my privilege and my great honor to
call upon you to address this joint
session of the houses of the Oireachtas
Parliament and it's worth noting that
this is only the second joined a such
joint session since the foundation of
our state
thank you very much
I must tell that is in the heaven leader
of the Workers Party that anything
reduction has taken I'm sorry
I am fully cognizant of the great honor
that has been done me by your invitation
for me to speak here
and I can't help but say I wonder if
there is an awareness and some that
there are countries in the world today
where representatives would not have
been able to speak as they have here
when I stepped off Air Force One at
Shannon a few days ago and saw Ireland
beautiful and green and felt again the
warmth of her people something deep
inside began to stir who knows but that
scientists will someday explain the
complex genetic process by which
generations seem to transfer across time
and even oceans their fondest memories
until they do I will have to rely on
President Lincoln's words about the
mystic chords of memory and say to you
that during the past few days at every
stop here in your country those chords
have been gently and movingly struck so
I hope you won't think it too bold of me
to say that my feelings here this
morning can best be summarized by the
words home home again now I know some of
us Irish Americans tend to get carried
away with our ancestral past and want
very much to impress our relatives here
with how well we've done in the new
world many of us aren't back in Ireland
five minutes before as the American song
has it were looking to shake the hand of
Uncle Mike
and kiss the girl we used to swing down
by the garden gate well I do want you to
know that for Nancy and me these last
few days will remain in our hearts
forever from Shannon to Galway to Bali
Perrine to Dublin you have truly made us
feel as welcome as the flowers in May
and for this we'll always be grateful to
you and the Irish people now of course I
didn't exactly expect a chilly reception
as I look around this chamber I know I
can't claim to be a better Irishman than
anyone here but I can perhaps claim to
be an Irishman a longer than most any of
you
there are those who just refused to let
me forget that I also have some other
credentials
I am the great-grandson of a Tipperary
man I'm the president of a country with
the closest possible ties to Ireland and
I was a friend of Barry Fitzgerald when
Irishmen told me he thought I would fit
in mr. president he said you loved a
good story
you loved horses you loved politics the
accent we can work on but I also came to
the land of my forebears to acknowledge
two debts to express gratitude for a
light heart and a strong Constitution
and to acknowledge that wellspring of so
much American political success the
Blarney Stone I don't have to tell you
how the Blarney Stone works many times
for example I have congratulated
Italians on Christopher Columbus
discovery of America but that's not
going to stop me from congratulating all
of you on Brendan the Navigator I think
you know though that Ireland has been
much in our thoughts since the first
days in office and proud to say the
first embassy I visited as president was
Ireland and I'm proud that our
administration is blessed by so many
cabinet members of Irish extraction
indeed I had to fight them off Air Force
One or there wouldn't be anyone tending
the store while we're gone and that's
not to mention the number of Irish
Americans who hold extremely important
leadership posts today in the United
States Congress I can assure you that
Irish Americans speak with one voice
about the importance of the friendship
of our two nations and the bonds of
affection between us the American people
know how profoundly Ireland has affected
our national heritage and our growth
into a world power and I know that they
want me to assure you today that your
interests and concerns are ours and that
in the United States you have true and
fast friends our visit is a joyous
moment and it will remain so but this
should not keep us from serious work or
serious words
this afternoon I want to speak directly
on a few points I know many of you
recall was sadness the tragic events of
last Christmas the five people killed
and 92 injured after a terrorist bomb
went off in Harrods of London just the
day before a Garda recruitin Gary
Sheehan and private Patrick Kelly a
young Irish soldier with four children
were slain by terrorists bullets these
two events occurring 350 miles apart one
in Ireland one in Britain demonstrated
the pitiless indiscriminate nature of
terrorist violence of violence evil to
its core and contemptible in all its
forms and it showed that the problems of
Northern Ireland are taking a toll on
the people of both Britain and Ireland
north and south yet the trouble in the
north affects more than just these two
great Isles when he was in America in
March your Prime Minister courageously
denounced the support that a tiny number
of misguided Americans give to these
terrorist groups I joined him that in
that denunciation is - the vast majority
of Irish Americans I repeat today there
is no place for the crude cowardly
violence of terrorism not in Britain not
in Ireland not in Northern Ireland all
sides should have one goal before them
and let us state it simply and directly
to end the violence to end it completely
and to end it now
the terrorism
the terrorism the sense of crisis that
has existed in Northern Ireland has been
costly to all but let us not overlook
legitimate cause for hope in the events
of the last few months as you know
active dialogue between the governments
here in Dublin and in London is
continuing there's also the constructive
work of the new Island Ireland forum the
forum's recent report has been praised
it's also been criticised but the
important thing is that men of peace are
being heard and their message of
reconciliation discussed the position of
the United States and all of this is
clear we must not and will not interfere
in Irish matters nor prescribe to use
solutions or formulas but I want you to
note that we pledge to you our goodwill
and support and we're with you as you
work toward peace I'm not being overly
optimistic when I say today that I
believe you will work out a peaceful and
democratic reconciliation of Ireland's
two different traditions and communities
besides being a land whose concern for
freedom and self-determination is
legendary Ireland is also a land
synonymous with hope it is this sense of
hope that saw you through famine and war
the since so many Irish men and women
abroad to seek new lives and to build
new nations gave the world the saints
and scholars who preserved Western
culture the missionaries and soldiers
who spoke of human dignity and freedom
and put much of the spark to my own
country's quest for independence and
that of other nations you are still that
land of hope it's nowhere more obvious
than in the economic changes being
wrought here I know Ireland faces a
serious challenge to create jobs for
your population but you've made striking
gains attracting the most advanced
technology and industries in the world
and improving the standard of living of
your people and you've done all of this
while maintaining your traditional
values and religious heritage renewing
your culture and language and continuing
to play a key role
in the world community based on
Ireland's traditional neutrality in
international affairs you can be proud
of your contribution to the search for
peace Irish soldiers have been part of
eight United Nations peacekeeping
operations since you joined that
organization in the economic sphere we
Americans too are proud that our
business has been permitted to prosper
in Ireland's new economic environment as
you know there are more than 300
American businesses here providing
between 35,000 and 40,000 jobs we're
continuing to encourage this investment
and I assure today you today that we
will will encourage even greater
investment for the future I think
I think part of the explanation for the
economic progress you are making here is
in Ireland can be found in your nation's
historic regard for personal freedom too
often the link between prosperity and
freedom is overlooked in fact it's as
tight as ever
and it provides a firm basis for
increasing cooperation not only between
our two countries but among all
countries the globe that recognizes men
and women everywhere in our shrinking
world are having the same experience for
most of mankind the oceans are no longer
the fearful distances they were when my
great grandfather Michael Reagan took
weeks to reach America some men and
women still set out with their children
in small boats fleeing tyranny and
deprivation for most of us though the
oceans and Airways are now peaceful
avenues throned with ideas people and
goods going in every direction they draw
us together slowly but surely more and
more people share the values of peace
prosperity and freedom which unites
Ireland and America in the last year
I've made two visits to America's
neighbors across the Pacific and Asia
this century has brought the Pacific
nations many hardships and many
difficulties and differences remain but
what I found everywhere was energy
optimism and excitement some nations in
Asia have produced astounding economic
growth rates by providing incentives
that reward initiative by unleashing
freedom more and more there was a sense
of common destiny and possibility for
all the peoples of this great region the
vast Pacific has become smaller but the
future of those who live around it is
larger than ever before coming to
Ireland I sense the same stirring the
same optimism toward a better future
I believe that great opportunities do
lie I had to overcome the age-old
menaces of disease and hunger and what
but moments of great progress can also
be moments of great testing President
Kennedy noted when he was here
that we live in a most climactic period
but also he said in the most difficult
and dangerous struggle in the history of
the world he was talking about our
century struggle between the forces of
freedom and totalitarianism a struggle
over shadow we all know too well by
weapons of awful destruction on both
sides believe me to hold the office that
I now hold is to understand each waking
moment of the day the awesome
responsibility of protecting peace and
preserving human life the responsibility
cannot be met with half-way wishes it
can be met only by a determined effort
to consolidate peace with all the
strength America can bring to bear this
is my deepest commitment to achieve
stable peace not just by being prepared
to deter aggression but also by assuring
that economic strength helps to lead the
way to greater stability through growth
and human progress being prepared with
the strength of our commitment to pursue
all possible avenues for arms reduction
and being prepared with the greatest
strength of all the spiritual strength
and self-confidence that enables us to
reach out to our adversaries to them and
to all of you who have always been our
dear and trusted friends I tell you
today from my heart America is prepared
for peace
what we're doing now in American foreign
policy is bringing an enduring
steadiness particularly in the search
for arms reduction too often in the past
we sought to achieve grandiose
objectives and sweeping agreements
overnight at other times we set our
sights so low that the agreements when
they were made permitted the numbers and
categories of weapons to soar for
example one nation from the time of the
signing of the salt to agreement until
the present has added three thousand
nine hundred and fifty warheads to its
arsenal that might be arms limitation it
certainly is an arms reduction the
result was it wasn't even arms control
through all of this I'm afraid different
proposals and shifting policies have
sometimes left both friends and
adversaries confused or disconcerted and
that's why we've put forward
methodically one of the most extensive
arms control programs in history we
believe there can be only one policy for
all nations if we are to preserve
civilization in this modern age a
nuclear war cannot be won and must never
be fought
in five areas we have proposed
substantive initiatives in Vienna less
than two months ago the western side put
forward new proposals on reducing the
levels of conventional military forces
in Europe in the same week in Geneva
Vice President Bush put forward a draft
agreement for a worldwide ban on
chemical weapons the gases that have
been used in Afghanistan and in
Kampuchea
in Stockholm we're pursuing at the
conference on Disarmament in Europe a
series of proposals that will help
reduce the possibility of conflict and
in Geneva as most of you are aware we
have been participating until recently
in arms reduction talks on two fronts
the start talks on reducing
intercontinental nuclear forces and the
INF talks which deal with the issue of
intermediate range missiles worldwide in
addition we're working to prevent the
spread of nuclear weapons and to require
comprehensive safeguards on all nuclear
exports during the months the start and
INF talks were underway the United
States proposed seven different
initiatives
none of these were offered on a
take-it-or-leave-it basis indeed we made
a number of adjustments to respond to
the stated concerns of the Soviet side
while Soviet flexibility did not match
our own the Soviets also made some steps
of the kind required in any serious
negotiations but then after the first
deployment of intermediate range
missiles here in Europe the Soviets quit
the bargaining table now this deployment
was not something we welcomed it had
been my hope and that of the European
leaders that negotiations would make the
deployments unnecessary unfortunately
the Soviet stance in those talks left us
no alternative since 1977 while we were
not deploying but urging the Soviets to
negotiate they were deploying some 370
ss-20 missiles capable of reaching every
city and every country in Europe we and
our allies could not ignore this threat
forever
but I believe today it is still possible
to
reach an agreement let me assure you
that in both the start and the INF talks
we want to hear several Soviet proposals
we want them to hear our own and we're
prepared to negotiate tomorrow if the
Soviets so choose I am prepared to halt
and even reverse the deployment of our
enemy intermediate-range missiles from
Europe as the outcome of a verifiable
and equitable agreement but for such an
outcome to be possible we need to have
the Soviets return to the bargaining
table before this body and the people of
Europe I call on them to do so
indeed I believe we must not be
satisfied we dare not rest until the day
we banished these terrible weapons of
war from the face of the earth forever
my deepest hope and dream has been that
if once we can together start down the
road of reduction we will inevitably see
the common sense of going all the way so
that our children and grandchildren will
not have to live with that threat
hanging over the world
in addition to the arms control
negotiations I want to stress today that
the United States seeks greater dialogue
in two other critical areas of east-west
relations just as we seek to reduce the
burden of armaments we want to find also
ways to limit their use in troublesome
or potentially difficult regional
situations so we seek - serious
discussions with the Soviets the guard
against miscalculation or
misunderstanding in troubled or
strategically sensitive areas of the
world I want to stress again today the
serious commitment of the United States
to such a process in the Stockholm
conference I mentioned a moment ago the
United States and 34 other nations are
negotiating measures to lessen east-west
tensions and reduce uncertainties
arising from military activities in
Europe the area with the greatest
concentration of armed forces in the
world the 16 nations of the Atlantic
Alliance have advanced concrete
proposals which would make conflict in
Europe less likely the Soviet Union has
not accepted these proposals but is
focused upon a declaration of the
non-use of force well near restatement
of a principle all nations have agreed
in discussions on reaffirming the
principle not to use force a principle
in which we believe so deeply will bring
the Soviet Union to negotiate agreements
which will give concrete new meaning to
that principle we will gladly enter into
such discussions I urge the Soviet Union
now to join all other countries in the
Stockholm conference to move promptly to
take these steps which will help ensure
peace and stability in Europe we seek to
build confidence and trust with the
Soviets in areas of mutual interest when
moving forward in our bilateral
relations on a broad front in the
economic field we're taking a number of
steps to increase exchanges in non
strategic goods in other areas we have
for example extended our very useful
incidents at sea agreement for another
term
and we've proposed discussions for
specific steps to expand and multiply
contacts of benefit to our people I
might add here that the democracies have
a strong mutual obligation to work for
progress in the area of human rights and
positive Soviet steps in this area would
be considered by the United States a
significant signal in summary then we're
seeking increased discussion and
negotiation to reduce armaments solve
regional problems and improve bilateral
relations progress in these fronts would
enhance peace and security for people
everywhere I'm afraid the Soviet
response has been disappointing rather
than join us in our efforts to calm
tensions and achieve agreements the
Soviets appear to have chosen to
withdraw and to try to achieve their
objectives through propaganda rather
than negotiations the Soviets seek to
place the blame on the Americans for
this self-imposed isolation but they
have not taken these steps by our choice
we remain ready for them to join with us
and the rest of the world community to
build a more peaceful world in
solidarity with our allies confident we
threaten no nation peace and prosperity
are in the Soviet interest as well as in
ours so let us move forward steadiness
in pursuing our arms reduction
initiatives and bettering east-west
relations will eventually bear fruit but
steadiness is also needed in sustaining
the cause of human freedom when I was
last in Europe I spoke about a crusade
for freedom about the ways that
democracies could inaugurate a program
promoting the growth of democratic
institutions throughout the world and
now it is underway and this can may have
an impact in many ways in many places
and be a force for good some of course
focusing on the nations that have lost
their freedom in the post-war era argue
that a crusade for democratic values is
impractical or unachievable but we must
take the long view at the start of this
century there were but viewed
aqua sees today there are more than 50
comprising one-third of the world's
population and it is no coincidence
showing once again the link between
political economic freedom and material
progress that these nations enjoy the
highest standards of living history is
the work of free men and women not
unalterable laws it is never inevitable
but it does have directions and trends
and one trend is clear democracies are
not only increasing in number they're
growing in strength today they're strong
enough to give the cause of freedom
growing room and breathing space and
that's all the freedom ever really needs
the mass of mankind has not been born
with saddles on their backs Thomas
Jefferson said that freedom is the
flagship a--they of the future and the
flash fire of the future its spark
ignites the deepest and noblest
aspirations of the human soul those who
think the Western democracies are trying
to rollback history are missing the
point
history is moving in the direction of
self-government and the human dignity
that it institutionalizes and the future
belongs to the free on this point of
democratic development I think it is
vital to appreciate what has been
happening in the Western Hemisphere
particularly Latin America great strides
have been made in recent years in fact
26 of 33 Latin American countries today
are democracies or are striving to
become democracies I think it is also
vital to understand that the United
States current program of assistance to
several Central American countries is
designed precisely to assist this spread
of democratic self-rule now I know that
some see the United States a large and
powerful nation involved in the affairs
of smaller nations to the south and
conclude that our mission there must be
self seeking or interventionist well the
Irish people of all people know
Americans well we strive to avoid
violence or conflict
history is our witness on this point for
a number of years at the end of the last
war the United States had a monopoly on
nuclear weapons we did not exploit this
monopoly for territorial or imperial
gain we sought to do all in our power to
encourage prosperity and peace and
democracy in Europe one can imagine if
some other countries possibly had had
these weapons instead of the United
States would the world have been as much
at peace in the last 40 years as it has
been in a few days in France I will
stand near the only land in Europe that
is occupied by the United States those
mounds of Earth marked with crosses and
Stars of David the graves of Americans
who never came home who gave their lives
that others might live in freedom and
peace it is freedom and peace that the
people of a Central America seek today
three times in little more than two
years the people of El Salvador have
voted in free elections each time they
had to brave the threats of the
guerrillas supported by the Sandinista
regime in Nicaragua and by Cuba and the
Soviet Union these guerrillas used
violence to support their threats their
slogan in each one of those elections
has been vote today and die tonight yet
the people of El Salvador 1.4 million of
them have braved ambush and gunfire and
trudged for miles to vote for freedom
and then stood in line for hours waiting
their turn to vote some of our observers
who went down there many of them going
down convinced that perhaps we were
wrong in what we're trying to do there
came home converted some of them came
home converted by one woman standing in
the voting line had been there for hours
she had been shot she suffered from a
rifle bullet she refused to leave the
line for medical treatment until she had
had her Robert
to vote they came home convinced that
the people of El Salvador what democracy
all the united states is attempting to
do with only 55 military advisers and
474 million dollars in aid three-fourths
of which is earmarked for economic and
social development is give the
Salvadorans the chance they want for
democratic self-determination without
outside interference but this the
government of Nicaragua has been
determined not to permit by their own
admission they've been supplying on
training the Salvadoran guerrillas in
their own country they have never held
elections they have all but crushed
freedom of the press and moved against
labor unions outlawed political freedoms
and even sponsored mob action against
Nicaragua
independent Human Rights Commission and
imprisoned its director
despite this repression a hundred
thousand Nicaraguan Catholics attended a
rally on Good Friday this year to
support their church which has been
persecuted by the Sandinistas communist
dictatorship and the bishop has now
written a pastoral letter citing this
persecution of the church by that that
government and yet even in our own
country we didn't read anything of that
demonstration somehow word of it didn't
get out through the news channels of the
world in a homily to 4000 Nicaraguans
packed into Don Bosco church several
weeks ago the head of the Nicaraguan
Bishops Conference Bishop Pablo Antonio
Vega said the tragedy of the Nicaraguan
people is that we are living with a
totalitarian ideology that no one wants
in this country you may not have heard
about this again as I say the words of
Nicaraguan Archbishop al bando a Bravo
to those who say that the only course
for Central American countries is
Marxism Leninism we Christians must show
another
way that is to follow Christ whose path
is that of truth and liberty well the
vast majority of those now struggling
for freedom in Nicaragua
contrary to what the Sandinistas would
have the world believe are good and
worthy people who did not like the
Somoza dictatorship and who do not want
the communist dictatorship the tragedy
is they haven't been given a chance to
choose the people of Nicaragua and El
Salvador have a right to resist the
nightmare outside forces want to impose
on them just as they have a right to
resist extremist violence from within
whether from the left or right the
United States must not turn its back on
the democratic aspirations of the people
of Central America moreover this is a
worldwide struggle the Irish orator john
philpott Curran once said the condition
upon which God hath given Liberty to man
his eternal vigilance and yes military
strength is indispensable to freedom I
have seen four wars in my lifetime none
of them came about because the forces of
freedom were too strong in the moving
words used by the Czechoslovak charter
77 group just a week ago in reply to
supporters of nuclear disarmament in the
West they said unlike you we have
personal experience of other perhaps
less conspicuous but no less effective
means of destroying civilization than
those represented by thermonuclear war
some of us at the very least prefer the
risk involved in maintaining a firm
stance against aggression to the
certainty of the catastrophic
consequences of appeasement the struggle
between freedom and totalitarianism
today is not ultimately a test of arms
or missiles but a test of faith and
spirit and in this spiritual struggle
the Western mind and will is the crucial
battleground
we must not hesitate to express our
dream of freedom we must not be
reluctant to announce
the crucial distinctions between right
and wrong between political systems
based on freedom and those based on a
dreadful denial of the human spirit if
our adversaries believe that we will
diminish our own self-respect by keeping
silent or acquiescing in the face of
successive crimes against humanity
they're wrong what we see throughout the
world is an uprising of intellect and
will as lek Walesa said our souls
contain exactly the contrary of what
they wanted they wanted us not to
believe in God and our churches are full
they wanted us to be materialistic and
incapable of sacrifices we are an anti
materialistic capable of sacrifice they
wanted us to be afraid of the tanks of
the guns and instead we don't fear them
at all liqui listen well that does not
take the counsel of our fears let us
instead offer the world of politics of
Hope a forward strategy for freedom the
words of William Faulkner at a Nobel
Prize ceremony more than three decades
ago or an eloquent answer to those who
predict nuclear doomsday or the eventual
triumph of the super state man will not
merely injure Faulkner said he will
prevail because he will return to the
old verities and truths of the heart he
is immortal
because alone among creatures he has a
soul a spirit capable of compassion and
sacrifice and endurance those old
verities those truths of the heart human
freedom under God are on the march
everywhere in the world all across the
world today in the shipyards of Gdansk
the hills of Nicaragua the rice paddies
of Kampuchea the mountains of
Afghanistan the cry again is liberty and
the cause is the same as that spoken in
this chamber more than two decades ago
by a young American president who said a
future of peace and freedom it was
toward the end of his visit here that
John Fitzgerald Kennedy said I am going
to come back
and see old Shannon's face again and on
his last day in Ireland he promised
I certainly will come back in the
springtime it was a promise left unkept
for a spring that never came but surely
in our hearts there is the memory of a
young leader who spoke stirring words
about a brighter age for mankind about a
new generation that would hold high the
torch of Liberty and truly light the
world this is the task before us to
plead the case of humanity to move the
conscience of the world to march
together as in olden time in the cause
of freedom thank you again for this
great honor and god bless you all
members of the doll and Senate may I on
your behalf convey our gratitude to the
President of the United States of
America for the address with which he
has honored us as elected
representatives of the Irish people we
are proud that the elected president of
the great democracy of the Western world
has chosen to share his thoughts with us
in person mr. president we are
especially grateful for the interest you
have shown in our determination to
promote peace and stability throughout
Ireland Irish men and women from Roth
traditions in Ireland have over the past
centuries found a welcome and a freedom
in the United States they joined
together to assist in the development of
your great nation our hope is that that
example will assist our efforts you will
have seen during your stay in Ireland
practical results of your own
encouragement of American investment at
Ireland there are 350 American firms in
Ireland representing an investment of
4.6 billion dollars and providing 37,000
jobs I should like to thank you and
through you your fellow countrymen who
have assisted us in this way may I
conclude mr. producer president by
thanking you for your address and
wishing you and mrs. Regan Godspeed